Before writing this book, I had been designing, writing, tweaking, and rewriting my own role-playing
game, Legendary Quest, for over 20 years. In that time, I created seven editions of the game to which
only my close friends and I had access. The experience gave me great practice in designing games and
taught me much about how a role-playing game should work. Because I had approached my designs
from the vantage point of making the best game possible for my gaming group, I didn’t look too far afield
for how other games approached similar problems. My friends and I created designs that suited our
interests and we were happy with the results. And, in fact, we should have been pleased. Through our
efforts, Legendary Quest evolved into a fine game. I would like to thank all the LQ play-testers over the
years in helping me in my various game designs. I would especially like to thank Matt Ault, Dave
Bailey, James Bockmon, Mike Brown, Denys Carrico-Bockmon, Mark Chester, Leroy Hills, Melissa
Kirk, Mike Patrick, Adam Reid, and Paul White for all of their support and many design ideas over the
years.

When I made Legendary Quest available on the Internet, everything changed. A fan base sprouted up
that began providing feedback. And, I started interacting with other game authors, primarily on The
Forge website (http://www.indie-rpgs.com). To my delight, I discovered that I still had a lot to learn
about game design. Several years ago, the Forge was a forum devoted to exploring RPG Game Theory
and creating well-crafted independent role-playing games. To a game designer, The Forge was candy
store, amusement park, and Christmas all wrapped up into one. It kept me enthralled for years, although
my role was primarily been that of a silent lurker. Only rarely did I contribute back, and then only when I
thought I could provide some insight that others had overlooked. That didn’t happen often.
Unfortunately, not long after I put up an initial draft of this book on The Forge, the administrators made
the decision to de-emphasize the development of RPG Game Theory on their site and focus instead on
crafting new games. They locked the forum discussing RPG Theory, so visitors could read the
discussions that had taken place earlier, but prevented anyone from making new posts. At that point, I
largely lost interest in the site, although I still drop by from time to time.

Even so, I have always wanted to contribute something back to the community. To date, this book is my
best attempt at doing that. So, even though they do not know me very well (if at all), I would like to thank
the following people on The Forge for the inspiration they have given me over the years: Vincent Baker,
Paul Czege, Ron Edwards, John Kim, Timothy Kleinert, Chris Lehrich, Tony Lower-Basch, Ralph
Mazza, Clinton R. Nixon, Jared A. Sorensen, and M. J. Young.

There is one other Forge-ite to which I would like to express my deepest gratitude. Mike Holmes took
me under his wing early on in my game studies. He has provided me with a tremendous amount of
constructive criticism on my designs and has patiently tutored me on modern thoughts in game design
theory. I have never encountered anyone with as much sheer volume of knowledge about various role-
playing games as Mike. This work would be far less useful without his insight.

Finally, I would also like to give special thanks to Mike Cantrell for hosting and administering the LQ
Design Forums and for editing this book. Many people pointed out numerous flaws in an early draft of
RPG Design Patterns. So, it was obvious that I was in great need of Mike’s technical writing expertise. I
believe the book to be greatly enhanced by his efforts.

-- John Kirk\\
(9/13/2009)
